## 2020.02.27
## CS326 @ UNR
*Nick Szewczak\
Josiah Everson*

#### Control Flow
*Mechanisms for specifying control flow.*
- Sequencing
  - Line by line.
- Selection
  - In every language.
- Iteration
- Procedural Abstraction
- Recursion
- Concurrency
  - Why should I do this or that?
- Non-determinacy
  - You choose one path of execution over another.

What we mostly use in:
- Imperative languages
  - Sequencing
  - Iteration
  - Selection
- Functional (declarative) Languages
  - Recursion
- Logical Languages
  - Hides control flow from the programmer
    - This is done through backtracking.


Sequencing Example (Scheme):
```Scheme
(define (f x)
  (+ x 1) ; Does this line matter? No, because it does not affect the outcome.
  (+ x 2))

(define (f x)
  (display x) ; Does this line matter? Yes, because it does something.
  (+ x 2))
```
*Conclusion: Sequencing is only relevant in the presence of side effects.*

Question: Why is it good to have no side effects?

Ensure that functions are **idempotent**.
- Can call a funtion repeatedly with the same parameters -> same result.
- The moment when a function is called does not affect the surrounding code.

Example:\
*Are these equivalent?*
```C++
// 1        // 2
a = f(b);   c =d;
c = d;      a = f(b);

// No, if f changes d. Yes, if f does not change d.
```
#### Expressions and Statements
Expressions generate a value.
Statements just have side effects.

Statement-oriented Languages
- Distinguish between statements and Expressions
- Statements are the building blocks

Expression-oriented languages
- No distinction. Everything in an expression must return a value.

```Algol-68
begin
  a:= if b < c then d else e; // a is set to d or e
  x:= begin f(y); g(z) end;   // x is set to return val. of g
  g(d);                       // this does not matter unless it has side effects
  p := q := r;                // right-to-left associativity
  2 + 3;
end                           // entire statement returns 5
```

#### Expression Evaluation
Expressions
- either a simple object (const or var) or an operator applied on a collection of operands, each of which is an expression
- it results in a value
Operators
- can be

#### Precedence and associativity
- Precedence
  - which operators have higher priority
  - which operators group "more tightly" than others in the absence of parentheses
- associativity
  - right-to-left or
  - left-to-right





*Note: take things piece-wise when determining prefix notation.*

Infix: 1+2+3\
Prefix:
- +1+23
  - *wrong associativity*
- ++123
  - *correct associativity*

Infix: 9-3*2+1\
Prefix:\
\*32\
-9(\*32)\
+(-9(\*32))1\
\+\-9\*32

Infix: 4\*(1+2)\
Prefix:\
+12\
\*(+12)4\
\*4+12

Infix: 4*1+2\
Prefix: \
\*41\
+(\*41)2


#### Assignments
- What is a variable?
  - It depends on the context in which it appears.
- In C, what is the meaning of a in the following code:
```C
d = a;      // the value of a
a = b + c;  // the location (address) of a
```

Expressions that denote locations &rightarrow; left values\
Expressions that denote values &rightarrow; right values

Examples
- a &rightarrow; has both r-value and l-value
- 5+1 &rightarrow; only r-value
- NULL &rightarrow; only r-value (it is a const)
- b[i] &rightarrow; both
- p->s &rightarrow; both
- f(a) &rightarrow; has r-value. may have l-value

#### Assignments vs. Initialization

Difference between:
```C
// A          // B
int a = 1;    int a;
              a = 1;

// In A, a is automatically set to 1.
```
Difference between:
```C
// A
void f(int x) {
  int a = 1;
}

// B
void f(int x) {
  int a;
  a = 1;
}

/*  In A, the local variable is allocated on the stack at runtime.
    Therefore, there is no difference. */
```

Combination Assignment Operators
- Update a variable
```C
// Example A
  a= a + 1;
// Example B
  b.c[3].d = b.c[3].d*e
// Example C
  a[f(x)] = a[f(x)] + 3;
```
- Why is this not desirable?
  - Because the compiler will have to compute the address twice.
  - Redundant for the programmer because we have to write the same thing twice.
  - In example C, if f has side effects.
- Therefore we use combination assignment operators.
```C
a += 1;
b.c[3].d *= e;
```
- We also use prefix and postfix increment/decrement operations.
```C
int i = 5;
A[++i] = b;
// or
int k = 5;
A[k--] = b;
```

#### Short-Circuit Evaluation
- Relevant to boolean expressions.
- Only evaluate as much as needed
  - Ex: OR, AND
- Examples
  - if (b != 0 && a/b == c)
  - if (p && p->foo)
  - if (i >= 0 && i < N_MAX & A[i] > x)

- C has short-circuit evaluation.
- Pascal only has regular evaluation.
- Clu has both.
  - AND and OR
    - regular evaluation
  - CAND and COR
    - short-circuit evaluation
  - This is nice when you want the side effects.

#### Structured and Unstructured Flow
- In assembly languages you had
  - conditional jumps
  - unconditional jumps
- Early Imperative Languages mimicked this.
  - Goto was abandoned and we then got
    - selections (if, then, else)
    - iteration (for, while)
- Sometimes we still need to get out of functions.
  - In C (break, continue)
