# 2020.02.20
### CS 326 @ UNR

*Electronic submission note: Submit a scheme file and not a PDF or Word file.*

- separate lists for blocks of different sizes
- buddy system (REFER TO FIG. 1a)
  - when you receive a request of size 2^k and if the 2^k list is full, split a 2^(k+1) block and put the remainder in the 2^k list

#### Deallocation
- if the heap-based allocation is explicit (ex: new, malloc, etc...)
  - usually the responsibility to deallocate stays with the programmer (delete, free, etc...)
- if allocation was implicit
  - the deallocation is automatic (garbage collection)

#### Scope Rules
- statically scoped languages
  - the scope for a binding is determined before runtime by examining the program text
  - (lexically scoped languages)
- dynamically scoped languages
  - scopes depend on the flow of execution and are determined during runtime

#### Static Scoping
- nested scopes
  - closest nested scope rule
    - a name introduced in a declaration is known in that scope where it was declared and in each internally nested scope unless it is hidden by another declaration with the same name
  - to find the declaration referenced by a name
    - first look in the current scope
    - if not there, look in the next outer scope and repeat until found
    - if not there, look in the global scope
    - if still not there &rightarrow; error

#### Example Scopes
```C++
procedure P1(A1:T1)
|  var x: real
|  procedure P2(A2:T2)
|  |  procedure P3(A3:T3)
|  |  |  ...
|  |  |...
|  |...
|  procedure P4(A4:T4)
|  |  function F1(A5:T5) : T6
|  |  |  var x: int
|  |  |  ...
|  |  ...
|  |...
|...
```
Questions
- Can F1 call P2? Yes.
- Can P2 call F1? No.
- Can P3 use x? Yes, the real one.
- If P4 uses x, which x? The real one.
- If F1 uses x, which x? The int one.

#### How to physically access objects defined in outer scopes?
```C++
A
| int x;
| B
| | C
| | | ...
| | D
| | | ...
| E
| | ...
| ...
```
Calls: A &rightarrow; E &rightarrow; B &rightarrow; D &rightarrow; C\
*All these calls are possible.*

Can we use x in C? Yes.
  - access x through static chains (REFER TO FIG. 1b)
  - follow two pointers (C is inside B which is inside A. x is inside A)

#### Import/Export Strategy in Modules
- "Modules" are old versions of classes that do not have inheritance
- objects inside are visible to each other
- objects inside are not visible outside unless explicitly exported
- objects outside are
  - visible inside automatically (open scope modules)
  - not visible inside unless explicitly exported (closed scopes)

In C:\
Are subroutine scopes open or closed? Open.\
Are file scopes open or closed? Closed.\
  *(ex: one file declares `int x;` and the other file calls `x`)*

#### Dynamic Scoping
- bindings depend on program execution
- rule: choose the most recent active binding for a name

#### Static vs. Dynamc Scoping
```C
a : int
procedure first
  a = 1   // global a
procedure second
  a : int //
  first();

// main
a = 2     // global a
second();
write(a); // global a
```
**Static:**\
global a &leftarrow; 2\
global a &leftarrow; 1\
write global a &leftarrow; 1

**Dynamic**\
global a &leftarrow; 2\
local a &leftarrow; 1\
local a dies *(because we left the scope)*\
write global &leftarrow; 2 *(because local a died)*

####  Binding Rules
- Referencing environment
  - the set of all active bindings at a given moment at runtime
- additional issue: when a subroutine is one of three things below and later called
  - passed as argument
  - returned as a result
  - or stored in a variable
`x = f(5, g(3));` // not what we are talking about
`x = f(5,g);`     // function passed as argument
